---
title: "Sobre los autos voladores y la tasa decreciente de ganancia"
author: Mark S. Fisher
layout: post
cover: "assets/covers/single_.png"
slider: "assets/covers/slider_.png"
---

Sobre los autos voladores y la tasa decreciente de ganancia
==============================================================================

A secret question hovers over us, a sense of disappointment, a broken promise we
were given as children about what our adult world was supposed to be like. I am
referring not to the standard false promises that children are always given
(about how the world is fair, or how those who work hard shall be rewarded), but
to a particular generational promise—given to those who were children in the
fifties, sixties, seventies, or eighties—one that was never quite articulated as
a promise but rather as a set of assumptions about what our adult world would be
like. And since it was never quite promised, now that it has failed to come
true, we’re left confused: indignant, but at the same time, embarrassed at our
own indignation, ashamed we were ever so silly to believe our elders to begin
with.

Una pregunta secreta flota sobre nosotras, una sensación de decepción, una
promesa rota que nos fue dada de niñas sobre cómo sería el mundo al convertirnos
en adultas.  No me refiero a las falsas promesas estándar, que son dadas siempre
a las niñas (sobre cómo el mundo es justo, o cómo aquellas que se esfuercen más
serán las mejor recompensadas), sino a la promesa generacional particular
--hecha a las que fuimos niñas en los cincuentas, sesentas, setentas, u
ochentas-- que nunca fue articulada como tal, más bien fueron dadas como un
conjunto de asumiciones respecto a cómo sería nuestro mundo adulto.  Y como
nunca fue realmente prometida, ahora que no se ha convertido en realidad, nos
hemos quedado confundidas: indignadas, pero al mismo tiempo, avergonzadas de
nuestra propia indignación; avergonzadas, en primer lugar, que fuimos tan tontas
en creer a nuestros mayores.

Where, in short, are the flying cars? Where are the force fields, tractor beams,
teleportation pods, antigravity sleds, tricorders, immortality drugs, colonies
on Mars, and all the other technological wonders any child growing up in the
mid-to-late twentieth century assumed would exist by now? Even those inventions
that seemed ready to emerge—like cloning or cryogenics—ended up betraying their
lofty promises. What happened to them?

En concreto, ¿dónde están los autos voladores?  ¿Dónde están los campos de
fuerza, los rayos tractores, los podios de teletransportación, los trineos
antigravitacionales, tricorders, las drogas de la inmortalidad, las colonias en
Marte, y todas las otras maravillas tecnológicas que cualquier niña que haya
crecido a partir de mediados del siglo XX asumía que iban a existir para este
momento?  Incluso aquellas invenciones que parecían listas para emerger --como
la clonación o la criogenia-- terminaron traicionando sus amplias promesas.
¿Qué fué lo que les pasó?

We are well informed of the wonders of computers, as if this is some sort of
unanticipated compensation, but, in fact, we haven’t moved even computing to the
point of progress that people in the fifties expected we’d have reached by
now. We don’t have computers we can have an interesting conversation with, or
robots that can walk our dogs or take our clothes to the Laundromat.

Estamos bien informadas de las maravillas de la informática, como si se tratara
de una compensación no anticipada, pero, de hecho, la informática tampoco ha
superado el punto de progreso que las personas de los '50 esperaban que tuviera
actualmente.  No tenemos computadoras con las que mantener conversaciones
interesantes, o robots que paseen a nuestros perros o lleven la ropa a la
lavandería.

As someone who was eight years old at the time of the Apollo moon landing, I
remember calculating that I would be thirty-nine in the magic year 2000 and
wondering what the world would be like. Did I expect I would be living in such a
world of wonders? Of course. Everyone did. Do I feel cheated now? It seemed
unlikely that I’d live to see *all* the things I was reading about in science
fiction, but it never occurred to me that I wouldn’t see *any* of them.

En tanto alquien que tenía ocho años cuando Apollo aterrizó en la luna, me
recuerdo calculando que tendría treinta y nueve años en los mágicos 2000 y
preguntándome cómo sería el mundo.  ¿Esperaba vivir en un mundo lleno de
maravillas?  Por supuesto.  Todas lo esperaban.  ¿Me siento engañado ahora?
Parecía improbable que viviera para ver *todas* las cosas que leía en la ciencia
ficción, pero nunca se me hubiera ocurrido que no llegaría a ver *ninguna*.

At the turn of the millennium, I was expecting an outpouring of reflections on
why we had gotten the future of technology so wrong.  Instead, just about all
the authoritative voices—both Left and Right—began their reflections from the
assumption that we do live in an unprecedented new technological utopia of one
sort or another.

A la vuelta del milenio, esperaba un derrame de reflexiones sobre por qué nos
imaginamos el futuro de la tecnología tan mal.  En cambio, casi todas las voces
de autoridad --tanto de Izquierda como de Derecha-- hicieron sus reflexiones
desde la asunción que de hecho vivimos en una nueva utopía tecnológica sin
precedentes en cierto modo u otro.

The common way of dealing with the uneasy sense that this might not be so is to
brush it aside, to insist all the progress that could have happened has happened
and to treat anything more as silly. “Oh, you mean all that *Jetsons* stuff?”
I’m asked—as if to say, but that was just for children! Surely, as grown-ups, we
understand *The Jetsons* offered as accurate a view of the future as *The
Flintstones* offered of the Stone Age.

La forma más común de lidiar con la incómoda sensación de que esto podría no ser
así es descartarla a un costado, insistir que todo el progreso que
podía haber ocurrido ha ocurrido y tratar cualquier otra cosa como una tontería.  
"Ah, ¿vos decís esas cosas de *Los Supersónicos*?" me preguntan --¡como si fuera
una cosa para niñas!-- Seguramente, como adultas, entendemos que *Los
Supersónicos* ofrecían una visión del futuro tan certera como *Los Picapiedras*
ofrecían de la Edad de Piedra.

> Surely, as grown-ups, we understand *The Jetsons* offered as accurate a view
> of the future as *The Flintstones* did of the Stone Age.

> Seguramente, como adultas, entendemos que *Los Supersónicos* ofrecían una
> visión del futuro tan certera como *Los Picapiedras* ofrecían de la Edad de
> Piedra.

Even in the seventies and eighties, in fact, sober sources such as *National
Geographic* and the Smithsonian were informing children of imminent space
stations and expeditions to Mars. Creators of science fiction movies used to
come up with concrete dates, often no more than a generation in the future, in
which to place their futuristic fantasies.  In 1968, Stanley Kubrick felt that a
moviegoing audience would find it perfectly natural to assume that only
thirty-three years later, in 2001, we would have commercial moon flights,
city-like space stations, and computers with human personalities maintaining
astronauts in suspended animation while traveling to Jupiter. Video telephony is
just about the only new technology from that particular movie that has
appeared—and it was technically possible when the movie was showing. *2001* can
be seen as a curio, but what about *Star Trek*? The *Star Trek* mythos was set
in the sixties, too, but the show kept getting revived, leaving audiences for
*Star Trek Voyager* in, say, 2005, to try to figure out what to make of the fact
that according to the logic of the program, the world was supposed to be
recovering from fighting off the rule of genetically engineered supermen in the
Eugenics Wars of the nineties.

Incluso en los setentas y ochentas fuentes tan sobrias como *National
Geographic* y el Museo Smithsoniano informaban a las niñas de las inminentes
estaciones espaciales y expediciones a Marte.  Las creadoras de las películas de
ciencia ficción incluían fechas concretas, a menudo a no más de una generación
en el futuro, para colocar sus fantasías futuristas.  En 1968, Stanley Kubrick
sintió que las audiencias cinematográficas encontrarían perfectamente natural
que 31 años después, en el 2001, tendríamos vuelos comerciales a la luna,
estaciones espaciales similares a ciudades y computadoras con personalidades
humanas que mantendrían a las astronautas en suspensión animada mientras viajan
a Júpiter.  La video llamada es casi la única nueva tecnología de esa película
que ha aparecido --y ya era técnicamente posible cuando se estrenó--.  *2001*
puede ser vista como una curiosidad, ¿pero qué pasa con *Star Trek*?  La
mitología de *Star Trek* se situaba en los sesentas, también, pero el show
siguió siendo revivido hasta dejar a las audiencias de *Star Trek Voyager* en el
2005, intentando dilucidar el hecho en que de acuerdo con la lógica del
programa, el mundo estaría recuperándose de la dictadura de los super hombres
genéticamente creados, en las Guerras Eugenésicas de los noventas.

By 1989, when the creators of *Back to the Future II* were dutifully placing
flying cars and anti-gravity hoverboards in the hands of ordinary teenagers in
the year 2015, it wasn’t clear if this was meant as a prediction or a joke.

Para 1989, cuando las creadoras de *Volver al Futuro II* colocaban
diligentemente autos voladores y patinetas anti-gravedad en las manos de
adolescentes ordinarias en el año 2015, no estaba claro si se trataba de una
predicción o una broma.

The usual move in science fiction is to remain vague about the dates, so as to
render “the future” a zone of pure fantasy, no different than Middle Earth or
Narnia, or like *Star Wars,* “a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away.” As a
result, our science fiction future is, most often, not a future at all, but more
like an alternative dimension, a dream-time, a technological Elsewhere, existing
in days to come in the same sense that elves and dragon-slayers existed in the
past—another screen for the displacement of moral dramas and mythic fantasies
into the dead ends of consumer pleasure.

La estrategia usual en ciencia ficción es mantener cierta vaguedad en las
fechas, de forma de convertir "el futuro" en una zona de fantasía pura, no muy
diferente a la Tierra Media o Narnia, o como en *Star Wars*, "en una época muy
lejana, en una galaxia muy, muy lejana".  Como resultado, nuestro futuro en la
ciencia ficción es, muy a menudo, nada parecido a un futuro, sino más bien una
dimensión alternativa, un tiempo de ensueño, un Otro Lugar tecnológico,
existiendo en días por venir en el mismo sentido que los elfos y los cazadores
de dragones existieron en el pasado --otra pantalla para el corrimiento de los
dramas morales y las fantasías míticas hacia los callejones sin salida del
placer del consumidor.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber02w600.png){.alignleft
.wp-image-1960 width="450" height="300"}

Might the cultural sensibility that came to be referred to as postmodernism best
be seen as a prolonged meditation on all the technological changes that never
happened? The question struck me as I watched one of the recent *Star Wars*
movies. The movie was terrible, but I couldn’t help but feel impressed by the
quality of the special effects. Recalling the clumsy special effects typical of
fifties sci-fi films, I kept thinking how impressed a fifties audience would
have been if they’d known what we could do by now—only to realize, “Actually,
no.  They wouldn’t be impressed at all, would they? They thought we’d be *doing*
this kind of thing by now. Not just figuring out more sophisticated ways to
simulate it.”

¿Podría la sensibilidad cultural que suele ser referirda como posmodernismo
verse mejor como una prolongada meditación sobre todos los cambios tecnológicos
que nunca sucedieron?  La pregunta me asotó mientras veía una de las últimas
películas de *Star Wars*.  La película era horrible, pero no pude dejar de
impresionarme por la calidad de los efectos especiales.  Recordando los torpes
efectos especiales de las películas de ciencia ficción de los años cincuenta, me
quedé pensando en lo impresionante que hubiera sido para una audiencia de
aquella época presenciar lo que podemos hacer ahora --solo para darme
cuenta que "En realidad, no. No estarían impresionadas en absoluto, no?--.  
Aquellas personas pensaban que realmente estaríamos *haciendo* esas cosas, en el
presente, no encontrando formas cada vez más sofisticadas para simularlas.

That last word—*simulate*—is key. The technologies that have advanced since the
seventies are mainly either medical technologies or information
technologies—largely, technologies of simulation. They are technologies of what
Jean Baudrillard and Umberto Eco called the “hyper-real,” the ability to make
imitations that are more realistic than originals. The postmodern sensibility,
the feeling that we had somehow broken into an unprecedented new historical
period in which we understood that there is nothing new; that grand historical
narratives of progress and liberation were meaningless; that everything now was
simulation, ironic repetition, fragmentation, and pastiche—all this makes sense
in a technological environment in which the only breakthroughs were those that
made it easier to create, transfer, and rearrange virtual projections of things
that either already existed, or, we came to realize, never would. Surely, if we
were vacationing in geodesic domes on Mars or toting about pocket-size nuclear
fusion plants or telekinetic mind-reading devices no one would ever have been
talking like this. The postmodern moment was a desperate way to take what could
otherwise only be felt as a bitter disappointment and to dress it up as
something epochal, exciting, and new.

Esta última palabra --simular-- es clave.  Las tecnologías que han avanzado
desde los setentas han sido principalmente las médicas o informáticas
--ampliamente tecnologías de simulación.  Son las tecnologías que Jean
Baudrillad y Umberto Eco llamaron "hiperreales", la habilidad de realizar
imitaciones más realistas que sus originales.  La sensibilidad posmoderna, la
sensación de que de alguna forma hemos irrumpido en un nuevo período histórico
sin precedentes en el que hemos comprendido que no hay nada nuevo; que ahora
todo es simulación, repetición irónica, fragmentación y pastiche --todo esto
cobra sentido en un ambiente tecnológico donde los únicos progresos fueron
aquellos que hicieron más fácil la creación, transferencia y reagrupación de
proyecciones virtuales de cosas que ya existían o, como descubriríamos, nunca lo
harían.  Seguramente si vacacionáramos en domos geodésicos en Marte o tuviéramos
plantas de fusión nuclear de bolsillo o dispositivos telequinéticos de lectura
mental nadie tendría la necesidad de hablar al respecto.  El momento posmoderno
fue una forma desesperada de tomar lo que de otra forma hubiera sido amarga
decepción para convertirla en algo de época, excitante y nueva.

In the earliest formulations, which largely came out of the Marxist tradition, a
lot of this technological background was acknowledged.  Fredric Jameson’s
“Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism” proposed the term
“postmodernism” to refer to the cultural logic appropriate to a new,
technological phase of capitalism, one that had been heralded by Marxist
economist Ernest Mandel as early as 1972.  Mandel had argued that humanity stood
at the verge of a “third technological revolution,” as profound as the
Agricultural or Industrial Revolution, in which computers, robots, new energy
sources, and new information technologies would replace industrial labor—the
“end of work” as it soon came to be called—reducing us all to designers and
computer technicians coming up with crazy visions that cybernetic factories
would produce.

En sus formulaciones tempranas, que en su mayoría provenían de la tradición
marxista, mucho de este trasfondo tecnológico era reconocido.  "El
posmodernismo, o la lógica cultural del capitalismo tardío" de Fredric Jameson
proponía el término "posmodernismo" como referencia a la lógica cultural
apropiada para esta nueva y tecnológica fase del capitalismo, que ya venía
siendo anunciada por el economista marxista Ernest Mandel desde 1972.  Mandel
argumentaba que la humanidad se encontraba al borde de una "tercera revolución
tecnológica" tan profunda como las revoluciones agrícola e industrial, donde las
computadoras, las robots, las nuevas fuentes de energía y las nuevas tecnologías
de la información reemplazarían el trabajo industril --lo que pronto sería
llamado el "fin del trabajo"-- reduciéndonos a diseñadoras y técnicas
informáticas pergeñando las locas visiones que las fábricas cibernéticas
producirían.

End of work arguments were popular in the late seventies and early eighties as
social thinkers pondered what would happen to the traditional working-class-led
popular struggle once the working class no longer existed. (The answer: it would
turn into identity politics.)  Jameson thought of himself as exploring the forms
of consciousness and historical sensibilities likely to emerge from this new
age.

Los argumentos a favor del fin del trabajo eran populares a finales de los
setentas y a principios de los ochentas, cuando las pensadoras sociales
imaginaban qué sucedería a la lucha popular liderada por la clase obrera, una
vez que esta clase dejara de existir.  (La respuesta: se convertiría en la
política identitaria.)  Jameson pensaba que estaba explorando las formas de
conciencia y sensibilidades históricas que emergerían de esta nueva era.

What happened, instead, is that the spread of information technologies and new
ways of organizing transport—the containerization of shipping, for
example—allowed those same industrial jobs to be outsourced to East Asia, Latin
America, and other countries where the availability of cheap labor allowed
manufacturers to employ much *less* technologically sophisticated
production-line techniques than they would have been obliged to employ at home.

En cambio lo que sucedió fue que la difusión de las tecnologías de la
información y las nuevas formas de organizar el transporte --la
_contenedorización_ de los envíos, por ejemplo-- habilitó que esos mismos
trabajos industriales fueran tercerizados a Asia del Este, América Latina y
otros países donde la disponibilidad de trabajo barato permitió a los
capitalistas emplear técnicas de producción en línea *mucho menos* sofisticadas
tecnológicamente de lo que hubieran estado obligados a emplear localmente.

From the perspective of those living in Europe, North America, and Japan, the
results did seem to be much as predicted. Smokestack industries did disappear;
jobs came to be divided between a lower stratum of service workers and an upper
stratum sitting in antiseptic bubbles playing with computers. But below it all
lay an uneasy awareness that the postwork civilization was a giant fraud. Our
carefully engineered high-tech sneakers were not being produced by intelligent
cyborgs or self-replicating molecular nanotechnology; they were being made on
the equivalent of old-fashioned Singer sewing machines, by the daughters of
Mexican and Indonesian farmers who, as the result of WTO or NAFTA–sponsored
trade deals, had been ousted from their ancestral lands.  It was a guilty
awareness that lay beneath the postmodern sensibility and its celebration of the
endless play of images and surfaces.

Desde la perspectiva de aquellas viviendo en Europa, América del Norte y Japón,
los resultados fueron más o menos los esperados.  Las industrias de chimenea en
efecto desaparecieron; el trabajo se dividió entre un estrato bajo de
trabajadoras de servicios y uno más alto compuesto por burbujas asépticas
informáticas.  Pero debajo de todo esto descansa una conciencia intranquila de
que la civilización post-trabajo era un fraude gigantesco.  Nuestras zapatillas
de alta tecnología no estaba siendo producida por cyborgs inteligentes ni
nanotecnología molecular auto-replicante; estaban siendo manufacturados en el
equivalente de las máquinas de coser Singer, por las hijas de granjeras
mexicanas o indonesias que, como resultado de acuerdos comerciales esponsoreados
por la OMC o NAFTA, habían sido desalojadas de sus tierras ancestrales.  Era una
conciencia culpable la que descansaba bajo la sensibilidad posmoderna y su
celebración del infinito juego de imágenes y superficies.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber03w360.png){.alignright
.wp-image-1961 .size-full width="360" height="384"} [W]{.dropcap}hy did the
projected explosion of technological growth everyone was expecting—the moon
bases, the robot factories—fail to happen? There are two possibilities. Either
our expectations about the pace of technological change were unrealistic (in
which case, we need to know why so many intelligent people believed they were
not) or our expectations were not unrealistic (in which case, we need to know
what happened to derail so many credible ideas and prospects).

¿Por qué falló la explosión de crecimiento tecnológico que proyectábamos --las
bases lunares, las fábricas robot?  Hay dos posibilidades.  O bien nuestras
expectativas sobre el paso del cambio tecnológico no eran realistas (y de ser
así, tenemos que saber por qué tantas personas inteligentes no lo creían así) o
que nuestras expectativas eran realistas (y de ser así, tenemos que saber qué
fue lo que hizo que se descarrilaran tantas ideas y prospectos creíbles).

Most social analysts choose the first explanation and trace the problem to the
Cold War space race. Why, these analysts wonder, did both the United States and
the Soviet Union become so obsessed with the idea of manned space travel? It was
never an efficient way to engage in scientific research. And it encouraged
unrealistic ideas of what the human future would be like.

La mayoría de las analistas sociales eligió la primera explicación y trazó el
problema hasta la carrera espacial de la Guerra Fría.  ¿Por qué, se preguntan,
tanto los Estados Unidos como la Unión Soviética se obsesionaron con la idea del
viaje al espacio tripulado?  Nunca fue una forma eficiente para la investigación
científica y alentó ideas irreales sobre cómo sería el futuro de la humanidad.

Could the answer be that both the United States and the Soviet Union had been,
in the century before, societies of pioneers, one expanding across the Western
frontier, the other across Siberia? Didn’t they share a commitment to the myth
of a limitless, expansive future, of human colonization of vast empty spaces,
that helped convince the leaders of both superpowers they had entered into a
“space age” in which they were battling over control of the future itself? All
sorts of myths were at play here, no doubt, but that proves nothing about the
feasibility of the project.

¿Podría ser que ambas sociedades habían sido, un siglo atrás, sociedades de
pioneras, una expandiéndose hacia la frontera Oeste, la otra a través de
Siberia?  ¿Acaso no comparten un compromiso con el mito de un futuro expansivo y
sin límites, de colonización humana de vastos espacios vacíos, que les ayudaría
a convencer a los líderes de ambos superpoderes que habían entrado en una "edad
espacial" donde lucharían por el control del futuro mismo?  Todo tipo de mitos
estaban puestos en juego, sin duda, pero esto no prueba nada sobre la
factibilidad del proyecto.

Some of those science fiction fantasies (at this point we can’t know which ones)
could have been brought into being. For earlier generations, many science
fiction fantasies *had* been brought into being. Those who grew up at the turn
of the century reading Jules Verne or H.G. Wells imagined the world of, say,
1960 with flying machines, rocket ships, submarines, radio, and television—and
that was pretty much what they got. If it wasn’t unrealistic in 1900 to dream of
men traveling to the moon, then why was it unrealistic in the sixties to dream
of jet-packs and robot laundry-maids?

Algunas de esas fantasías de ciencia ficción (ya no podemos saber cuáles)
podrían haberse convertido en realidad.  Para las generaciones anteriores,
muchas fantasías de ciencia ficción _habían_ sido convertidas en realidad.
Aquellas que crecieron a principios de siglo leyendo a Julio Verne o H.G Wells
imaginaban el mundo de 1960 (por decir una fecha) con máquinas voladoras, naves
cohete, submarinos, radio y televisión --más o menos lo que obtuvieron.  ¿Si no
era irreal soñar en 1900 que las personas viajarían a la luna, entonces por qué
fue irreal en 1960 soñar con mochilas cohete y robots lavanderas?

In fact, even as those dreams were being outlined, the material base for their
achievement was beginning to be whittled away. There is reason to believe that
even by the fifties and sixties, the pace of technological innovation was
slowing down from the heady pace of the first half of the century. There was a
last spate in the fifties when microwave ovens (1954), the Pill (1957), and
lasers (1958) all appeared in rapid succession. But since then, technological
advances have taken the form of clever new ways of combining existing
technologies (as in the space race) and new ways of putting existing
technologies to consumer use (the most famous example is television, invented in
1926, but mass produced only after the war.) Yet, in part because the space race
gave everyone the impression that remarkable advances were happening, the
popular impression during the sixties was that the pace of technological change
was speeding up in terrifying, uncontrollable ways.

De hecho, mientras esos sueños eran delineados, la base material para
alcanzarlos estaba siendo cercenada.  Hay razones para creer que incluso en los
'50 y '60, el paso de la innovación tecnológica estaba aminorando el paso
acelerado de la primera mitad del siglo.  El último torrente fue en los '50 con
los hornos microondas (1954), la pastilla anticonceptiva (1957) y los lásers
(1958) apareciendo en rápida sucesión.  Pero desde entonces, los avances
tecnológicos han tomado la forma de combinaciones astutas de tecnologías
existentes (como en la carrera espacial) y nuevas formas de poner tecnologías
existentes en manos de las consumidoras (la televisión fue inventada en 1926
pero solo fue producida masivamente después de la guerra).  Aun así, en parte
porque la carrera espacial le dio a todo el mundo la impresión que se estaban
haciendo grandes avandces, la impresión popular durante los '60 fue que el paso
del cambio tecnológico se estaba acelerando de formas terribles e
incontrolables.

Alvin Toffler’s 1970 best seller *Future Shock* argued that almost all the
social problems of the sixties could be traced back to the increasing pace of
technological change. The endless outpouring of scientific breakthroughs
transformed the grounds of daily existence, and left Americans without any clear
idea of what normal life was. Just consider the family, where not just the Pill,
but also the prospect of in vitro fertilization, test tube babies, and sperm and
egg donation were about to make the idea of motherhood obsolete.

El _best-seller_ de Alvin Toffler _El shock del futuro_ (_Future Shock_, 1970)
argumentaba que casi todos los problemas sociales de los '60 podía trazarse al
creciente paso del cambio tecnológico.  La efusión infinita de descubrimientos
científicos transformó las bases de la existencia diaria y dejó a las
estadounidenses sin una idea clara de lo que era la vida normal.  Solo
considerando a la familia, donde no solo la pastilla sino también la perspectiva
de la fertilización _in vitro_, las bebés de probeta y la donación de esperma y
óvulos estaban a punto de volver obsoleta la idea de maternidad.

Humans were not psychologically prepared for the pace of change, Toffler
wrote. He coined a term for the phenomenon: “accelerative thrust.” It had begun
with the Industrial Revolution, but by roughly 1850, the effect had become
unmistakable. Not only was everything around us changing, but most of it—human
knowledge, the size of the population, industrial growth, energy use—was
changing exponentially. The only solution, Toffler argued, was to begin some
kind of control over the process, to create institutions that would assess
emerging technologies and their likely effects, to ban technologies likely to be
too socially disruptive, and to guide development in the direction of social
harmony.

Las humanas no estaban psicológicamente preparadas para el paso del cambio,
decía Toffler.  Incluso acuñó un término para el fenómeno: "empuje acelerante",
que había comenzado con la Revolución Industrial, pero que para 1850 el efecto
se había vuelto incontenible.  No solo todo lo que nos rodeaba estaba cambiando,
sino que casi todo --el conocimiento humano, el tamaño de la población, el
crecimiento industrial, el uso energético-- estaba cambiendo exponencialmente.
La única solución, decía Toffler, era empezar algún tipo de control sobre el
proceso, creando instituciones que analizarían las tecnologías emergentes y sus
efectos probables y prohibir aquellas que fueran socialmente disruptivas,
guiando el desarrollo en dirección de la armonía social.

// encontrar la traducción de "accelerative thrust" -- f

While many of the historical trends Toffler describes are accurate, the book
appeared when most of these exponential trends halted. It was right around 1970
when the increase in the number of scientific papers published in the world—a
figure that had doubled every fifteen years since, roughly, 1685—began leveling
off. The same was true of books and patents.

Mientras que muchos de las tendencias históricas que describió eran precisas, el
libro apareció cuando la mayoría de estas tendencias exponenciales se habían
detenido.  Era justo en los '70 cuando el incremento en la cantidad de _papers_
científicos publicados mundialmente empezó a nivelarse, cuando se habían
duplicado cada 15 años desde alrededor de 1685.  Esto también es cierto para los
libros y las patentes.

Toffler’s use of *acceleration* was particularly unfortunate. For most of human
history, the top speed at which human beings could travel had been around 25
miles per hour. By 1900 it had increased to 100 miles per hour, and for the next
seventy years it did seem to be increasing exponentially. By the time Toffler
was writing, in 1970, the record for the fastest speed at which any human had
traveled stood at roughly 25,000 mph, achieved by the crew of Apollo 10 in 1969,
just one year before. At such an exponential rate, it must have seemed
reasonable to assume that within a matter of decades, humanity would be
exploring other solar systems.

El uso de la "aceleración" que hizo Toffler fue particularmente desafortunado.
Para la mayor parte de la historia humana, la velocidad máxima a la que las
personas podían viajar era de 40 km/h.  Para 1900 se había incrementado a 160
km/h y dentro de los próximos 70 años parecía incrementarse exponencialmente.
Para el momento en que Toffler escribía, el récord de la máxima velocidad que
ninguna humana haya viajado era de 40.000 km/h, alcanzado por la tripulación de
_Apollo 10_ en 1969, un año antes de publicar su libro.  A esta tasa, parecía
razonable pensar que dentro de pocas décadas la humanidad estaría explorando
otros sistemas solares.

Since 1970, no further increase has occurred. The record for the fastest a human
has ever traveled remains with the crew of Apollo 10. True, the commercial
airliner Concorde, which first flew in 1969, reached a maximum speed of 1,400
mph. And the Soviet Tupolev Tu-144, which flew first, reached an even faster
speed of 1,553 mph. But those speeds not only have failed to increase; they have
decreased since the Tupolev Tu-144 was cancelled and the Concorde was abandoned.

Pero desde 1970 no ha habido tal incremento.  El récord de velocidad máxima lo
mantiene la tripulación de _Apollo 10_.  Es verdad que la aerolínea comercial
_Concorde_ que voló por primera vez en 1969, alcanzó una velocidad de 2.200 km/h
y el _Tupolev Tu-144_ soviético, que voló antes, alcanzó una velocidad aún más
rápida de 2.500 km/h.  Pero esas velocidades no han aumentado; solo han
disminuido desde que el _Tupolev Tu-144_ fue cancelado y el _Concorde_ fue
abandonado.

None of this stopped Toffler’s own career. He kept retooling his analysis to
come up with new spectacular pronouncements. In 1980, he produced *The Third
Wave,* its argument lifted from Ernest Mandel’s “third technological
revolution”—except that while Mandel thought these changes would spell the end
of capitalism, Toffler assumed capitalism was eternal. By 1990, Toffler was the
personal intellectual guru to Republican congressman Newt Gingrich, who claimed
that his 1994 “Contract With America” was inspired, in part, by the
understanding that the United States needed to move from an antiquated,
materialist, industrial mind-set to a new, free-market, information age, Third
Wave civilization.

Nada de esto detuvo la carrera de Toffler, que se mantuvo readaptando su
análisis para hacer anuncios cada vez más espectaculares.  En 1980, anunció _La
Tercera Ola_, que tomaba sus argumentos de la "tercera revolución tecnológica"
de Ernest Mandel.  Excepto que mientras Mandel pensaba que estos cambios serían
el fin del capitalismo, Toffler asumía que el capitalismo era eterno.  En 1990,
Toffler se había convertido en el gurú personal del senador republicano Newt
Gingrich, que proclamaba que su "Contrato con Norteamérica" de 1994 estaba
inspirado, en parte, en una comprensión de que los Estados Unidos tenían que
abandonar el pensamiento anticuado, materialista e industrial en favor de una
civilización de tercera ola, de libre mercado y era de la información.

There are all sorts of ironies in this connection. One of Toffler’s greatest
achievements was inspiring the government to create an Office of Technology
Assessment (OTA). One of Gingrich’s first acts on winning control of the House
of Representatives in 1995 was defunding the OTA as an example of useless
government extravagance. Still, there’s no contradiction here. By this time,
Toffler had long since given up on influencing policy by appealing to the
general public; he was making a living largely by giving seminars to CEOs and
corporate think tanks. His insights had been privatized.

Hay todo tipo de ironías en esta conexión.  Uno de los grandes logros de Toffler
fue inspirar al Estado a crear una Oficina de Análisis Tecnológico (_OTA_,
_Office of Technology Assessment_).  Uno de los primeros actos de Gingrich al
ganar el control de la casa de representantes en 1995 fue desfinanciar la OTA
como un ejemplo de inútil extravagancia estatal.  Pero aun así no existe una
contradicción.  Para ese momento, Toffler había renunciado hacía tiempo a
influenciar las políticas públicas por medio del interés general; se estaba
ganando la vida dando seminarios a CEOs y _think tanks_ corporativos.  Sus
análisis habían sido privatizados.

Gingrich liked to call himself a “conservative futurologist.” This, too, might
seem oxymoronic; but, in fact, Toffler’s own conception of futurology was never
progressive. Progress was always presented as a problem that needed to be
solved.

Gingrich gustaba llamarse un "futurólogo conservador".  Esto también parece un oxímoron, pero de hecho la concepción de la futurología que ostentaba Toffler nunca fue progresista.  El progreso siempre fue presentado como un problema que debía ser resuelto.

// no termine de captar si oxymoronic es un juego de palabras entre oxymoron y
moron -- f

Toffler might best be seen as a lightweight version of the nineteenth-century
social theorist Auguste Comte, who believed that he was standing on the brink of
a new age—in his case, the Industrial Age—driven by the inexorable progress of
technology, and that the social cataclysms of his times were caused by the
social system not adjusting.  The older feudal order had developed Catholic
theology, a way of thinking about man’s place in the cosmos perfectly suited to
the social system of the time, as well as an institutional structure, the
Church, that conveyed and enforced such ideas in a way that could give everyone
a sense of meaning and belonging. The Industrial Age had developed its own
system of ideas—science—but scientists had not succeeded in creating anything
like the Catholic Church. Comte concluded that we needed to develop a new
science, which he dubbed “sociology,” and said that sociologists should play the
role of priests in a new Religion of Society that would inspire everyone with a
love of order, community, work discipline, and family values. Toffler was less
ambitious; his futurologists were not supposed to play the role of priests.

Toffler podría ser visto como una version de peso ligero de Auguste Comte, el
teórico social del siglo XIX que creía que estaba parado al borde una nueva edad
--en su caso, la Edad Industrial-- impulsada por el inexorable progreso de la
tecnología y que los cataclismos sociales de su época eran causados por la falta
de ajuste del sistema social.  El orden feudal anterior había desarrollado la
teología católica como una forma de pensar el lugar de las personas en el cosmos
que estaba perfectamente adaptada a ese sistema social, así como una estructura
institucional, la Iglesia, que transmitía y hacía cumplir esas ideas de forma
que todas las personas tengan un sentido de significado y pertenencia.  La Edad
Industrial había desarrollado su propio sistema de ideas --la ciencia-- pero los
científicos no habían tenido éxito en crear algo similar a la Iglesia Católica.
Comte concluía que necesitábamos desarrollar una nueva ciencia, a la que llamó
"sociología", donde los sociólogos jugarían el rol de sacerdotes de una nueva
Religión de la Sociedad que inspiraría a todas las personas el amor por el
orden, la comunidad, la disciplina del trabajo y los valores familiares.
Toffler era menos ambicioso.  Sus futurólogos no tenían que actuar de
sacerdotes.

Gingrich had a second guru, a libertarian theologian named George Gilder, and
Gilder, like Toffler, was obsessed with technology and social change. In an odd
way, Gilder was more optimistic. Embracing a radical version of Mandel’s Third
Wave argument, he insisted that what we were seeing with the rise of computers
was an “overthrow of matter.”  The old, materialist Industrial Society, where
value came from physical labor, was giving way to an Information Age where value
emerges directly from the minds of entrepreneurs, just as the world had
originally appeared ex nihilo from the mind of God, just as money, in a proper
supply-side economy, emerged ex nihilo from the Federal Reserve and into the
hands of value-creating capitalists. Supply-side economic policies, Gilder
concluded, would ensure that investment would continue to steer away from old
government boondoggles like the space program and toward more productive
information and medical technologies.

Gingrich tenía un segundo gurú, un teólogo _libertarian_[^libertarian] llamado
George Gilde, que como Toffler, estaba obsesionado con la tecnología y el cambio
social.  De una forma extraña, Gilder era más optimista.  Abrazando una versión
radical de la tercera ola de Mandel, insistía que lo que estábamos presenciando
con el auge de las computadoras era un "derrocamiento de la materia".  La
sociedad industrial, vieja y materialista, donde el valor provenía del trabajo
físico, estaba cediendo lugar a una Edad de la Información donde el valor emerge
directamente de la mente de los emprendedores, tal como el mundo había aparecido
_ex nihilo_ de la mente de Dios y tal como el dinero en una economía de la
oferta propiamente dicha emerge _ex nihilo_ de la Reserva Federal hacia las
manos de los capitalistas creadores de valor.  Las políticas de la economía de
la oferta, concluía Gilder, asegurarían que las inversiones continuarían
alejándose de los programas estatales inútiles como el programa espacial hacia
las más productivas tecnologías médicas e informáticas.


[^libertarian]: Mantenemos _libertarian_ como en el original para denotar la diferencia con libertarias de raíz anarquista y anti capitalista.

But if there was a conscious, or semi-conscious, move away from investment in
research that might lead to better rockets and robots, and toward research that
would lead to such things as laser printers and CAT scans, it had begun well
before Toffler’s *Future Shock* (1970) and Gilder’s *Wealth and Poverty*
(1981). What their success shows is that the issues they raised—that existing
patterns of technological development would lead to social upheaval, and that we
needed to guide technological development in directions that did not challenge
existing structures of authority—echoed in the corridors of power. Statesmen and
captains of industry had been thinking about such questions for some time.

Pero si hubo una tendencia conciente, o semi-conciente, hacia el
desfinanciamiento de la investigación que podría llevar a mejores cohetes y
robots para favorecer aquella investigación que llevaría a las impresoras láser
y la tomografía computada, ya había comenzado mucho antes que _El shock del
futuro_ de Toffler (1970) y _Riqueza y pobreza_ de Gilder (1981).  Lo que su
éxito demuestra es que los problemas que nombraban --que los patrones existentes
de desarrollo tecnológico llevarían a un levantamiento social y que necesitamos
llevar esos desarrollos en direcciones que no desafíen las estructuras de
autoridad existentes-- hicieron eco en los pasillos del poder.  Los políticos y
los capitanes de la industria habían estado pensando sobre estos problemas por
un tiempo.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber06w360.png){.alignleft
.wp-image-1963 .size-full width="360" height="360"} [I]{.dropcap}ndustrial
capitalism has fostered an extremely rapid rate of scientific advance and
technological innovation—one with no parallel in previous human history. Even
capitalism’s greatest detractors, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, celebrated its
unleashing of the “productive forces.” Marx and Engels also believed that
capitalism’s continual need to revolutionize the means of industrial production
would be its undoing. Marx argued that, for certain technical reasons, value—and
therefore profits—can be extracted only from human labor. Competition forces
factory owners to mechanize production, to reduce labor costs, but while this is
to the short-term advantage of the firm, mechanization’s effect is to drive down
the general rate of profit.

El capitalismo industrial había criado una tasa de avances científicos e
innovación tecnológica extremadamente rápida, sin paralelo previo en la historia
de la humanidad.  Aun los mayores detractores del capitalismo, Karl Marx y
Friedrich Engels, celebraban la liberación de las "fuerzas productivas".  Marx y
Engels también creían que la necesidad continua del capitalismo de revolucionar
los medios de producción industrial llevarían a su destrucción.  Marx decía que
según ciertas razones técnicas, el valor --y por lo tanto las ganancias-- solo
podía extraerse del trabajo humano.  La competencia fuerza a los propietarios de
las fábricas a mecanizar la producción para reducir los costos laborales, pero
en tanto esto es una ventaja de corto plazo para la empresa, el efecto global de
la mecanización es reducir la tasa general de ganancia.

For 150 years, economists have debated whether all this is true. But if it is
true, then the decision by industrialists not to pour research funds into the
invention of the robot factories that everyone was anticipating in the sixties,
and instead to relocate their factories to labor-intensive, low-tech facilities
in China or the Global South makes a great deal of sense.

Durante 150 años las economistas han discutido si esto es verdad.  Pero si esto
es verdad, entonces cobra mucho sentido la decisión de los industrialistas de
desfinanciar la investigación que llevaría a la invención de las fábricas robot
que todo el mundo anticipaba en los '60 para en cambio convertir las fábricas en
instalaciones de trabajo intensivo y baja tecnología ubicadas en China o el Sur
Global.

As I’ve noted, there’s reason to believe the pace of technological innovation in
productive processes—the factories themselves—began to slow in the fifties and
sixties, but the side effects of America’s rivalry with the Soviet Union made
innovation appear to accelerate.  There was the awesome space race, alongside
frenetic efforts by U.S.  industrial planners to apply existing technologies to
consumer purposes, to create an optimistic sense of burgeoning prosperity and
guaranteed progress that would undercut the appeal of working-class politics.

Como dije, hay razones para creer que el paso de la innovación tecnológica en
los procesos productivos --las fábricas mismas-- comenzó a reducirse en los '50
y '60, aun cuando la rivalidad entre los Estados Unidos y la Unión Soviética
hacia creer que en realidad se estaba acelerando.  Teníamos la asombrosa carrera
espacial, junto con los frenéticos esfuerzos de los planificadores industriales
estadounidenses por implementar las tecnologías existentes hacia las
consumidoras finales.  Esto creaba una sensación optimista de prosperidad
floreciente y progreso garantizado que socavaría la atracción de la política
obrera.

These moves were reactions to initiatives from the Soviet Union. But this part
of the history is difficult for Americans to remember, because at the end of the
Cold War, the popular image of the Soviet Union switched from terrifyingly bold
rival to pathetic basket case—the exemplar of a society that could not
work. Back in the fifties, in fact, many United States planners suspected the
Soviet system worked better.  Certainly, they recalled the fact that in the
thirties, while the United States had been mired in depression, the Soviet Union
had maintained almost unprecedented economic growth rates of 10 percent to 12
percent a year—an achievement quickly followed by the production of tank armies
that defeated Nazi Germany, then by the launching of Sputnik in 1957, then by
the first manned spacecraft, the Vostok, in 1961.

Estas movidas fueron reacciones a iniciativas de la Unión Soviética.  Pero esta
parte de la historia resulta difícil de recordar para las estadounidenses,
porque hacia el fin de la Guerra Fría la imagen popular de la Unión Soviética
cambió desde una rival terriblemente audaz a una inútil patética, el ejemplo de
una sociedad incapaz de funcionar.  Pero en los '50, de hecho, muchos de los
planificadores de los Estados Unidos sospechaban que el sistema soviético
funcionaba mejor.  Ciertamente, recordaban el hecho de que en los '30, mientras
los Estados Unidos se hundían en la depresión, la Unión Soviética había
sostenido un crecimiento económico sin precedentes de entre 10 y 12% anuales.
Un logro sucedido rápidamente por la producción de ejércitos de tanques que
derrotarían a la Alemania Nazi, el lanzamiento del _Sputnik_ en 1957 y el primer
viaje espacial tripulado por la _Vostok_ en 1961.

It’s often said the Apollo moon landing was the greatest historical achievement
of Soviet communism. Surely, the United States would never have contemplated
such a feat had it not been for the cosmic ambitions of the Soviet Politburo. We
are used to thinking of the Politburo as a group of unimaginative gray
bureaucrats, but they were bureaucrats who dared to dream astounding dreams. The
dream of world revolution was only the first. It’s also true that most of
them—changing the course of mighty rivers, this sort of thing—either turned out
to be ecologically and socially disastrous, or, like Joseph Stalin’s
one-hundred-story Palace of the Soviets or a twenty-story statue of Vladimir
Lenin, never got off the ground.

Se dice muy a menudo que el aterrizaje en la luna fue uno de los más grandes
logros históricos del comunismo soviético.  Seguramente los Estados Unidos nunca
hubieran contemplado tarea tal si no fuera por las ambiciones cósmicas del
politburó soviético.  Estamos acostumbradas a pensar el politburó como un grupo
de buroócratas grises sin imaginación, pero en realidad fueron burócratas que se
animaron a soñar sueños asombrosos.  El sueño de la revolución mundial solo fue
el primero.  Es verdad que muchos de ellos --cosas como cambiar el curso de
poderosos ríos-- terminaron siendo ecológica y socialmente desastrosos, o nunca
progresaron, como el Palacio de los Soviets de 100 pisos de Iósif Stalin o la
estatua de Vladimir Lenin de 20 pisos.

After the initial successes of the Soviet space program, few of these schemes
were realized, but the leadership never ceased coming up with new ones. Even in
the eighties, when the United States was attempting its own last, grandiose
scheme, Star Wars, the Soviets were planning to transform the world through
creative uses of technology. Few outside of Russia remember most of these
projects, but great resources were devoted to them. It’s also worth noting that
unlike the Star Wars project, which was designed to sink the Soviet Union, most
were not military in nature: as, for instance, the attempt to solve the world
hunger problem by harvesting lakes and oceans with an edible bacteria called
spirulina, or to solve the world energy problem by launching hundreds of
gigantic solar-power platforms into orbit and beaming the electricity back to
earth.

Luego de los éxitos iniciales del programa espacial soviético, pocos de estos
planes fueron realizados, pero el liderazgo nunca cesó de imaginar nuevos.
Incluso en los '80, cuando los Estados Unidos intentaban su último y más
grandioso plan, la Guerra de las Galaxias,[^star-wars] los soviéticos
planificaban la transformación del mundo a través de usos creativos de la
tecnología.  Pocas fuera de Rusia recuerdan la mayor parte de estos proyectos,
aunque les fueron dedicados grandes recursos.  También hay que notar que al
contrario del proyecto de la Guerra de las Galaxias, que había sido diseñado
para hundir a la Unión Soviética, muchos de esos proyectos no tenían fines
militares.  Por ejemplo, el intento de solucionar el hambre mundial sembrando
lagos y oceános con una bacteria comestible llamada _spirulina_ o solucionar el
problema energética global lanzando cientos de plataformas solares al espacio y
enviando la electricidad de vuelta a la Tierra.

[^star-wars]:
    https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iniciativa_de_Defensa_Estrat%C3%A9gica

The American victory in the space race meant that, after 1968, U.S.  planners no
longer took the competition seriously. As a result, the mythology of the final
frontier was maintained, even as the direction of research and development
shifted away from anything that might lead to the creation of Mars bases and
robot factories.

La victoria estadounidense de la carrera espacial significó que después de 1968,
los planificadores dejaron de tomar seriamente a la competencia.  Como
resultado, se mantuvo la mitología de la frontera final, aun cuando la dirección
de la investigación y desarrollo pivotó hacia cualquier cosa que no tuviera que
ver con bases en Marte y fábricas robot.

The standard line is that all this was a result of the triumph of the
market. The Apollo program was a Big Government project, Soviet-inspired in the
sense that it required a national effort coordinated by government
bureaucracies. As soon as the Soviet threat drew safely out of the picture,
though, capitalism was free to revert to lines of technological development more
in accord with its normal, decentralized, free-market imperatives—such as
privately funded research into marketable products like personal computers. This
is the line that men like Toffler and Gilder took in the late seventies and
early eighties.

La historia estándar es que esto fue el resultado del triunfo del mercado.  El
programa _Apollo_ fue un proyecto del _Gran Gobierno_, de inspiración soviética
en el sentido de que requirió un esfuerzo nacional coordinado por burocracias
estatales.  Tan pronto como la amenaza soviética hubo pasado, el capitalismo
revirtió a líneas de desarrollo tecnológico más de acuerdo con sus imperativos
normales, decentralizados y de libre mercado, como la investigación con fondos
privados hacia bienes de consumo como las computadoras personales.  Esta es la
línea que siguen tipos como Toffler y Gilder a partir de los '70 y '80.

In fact, the United States never did abandon gigantic, government-controlled
schemes of technological development. Mainly, they just shifted to military
research—and not just to Soviet-scale schemes like Star Wars, but to weapons
projects, research in communications and surveillance technologies, and similar
security-related concerns. To some degree this had always been true: the
billions poured into missile research had always dwarfed the sums allocated to
the space program. Yet by the seventies, even basic research came to be
conducted following military priorities. One reason we don’t have robot
factories is because roughly 95 percent of robotics research funding has been
channeled through the Pentagon, which is more interested in developing unmanned
drones than in automating paper mills.

De hecho los Estados Unidos nunca abandonaron los planes estatales gigantescos
de desarrollo tecnológico.  En su mayoría se convirtieron en investigación
militar y no solo a escala soviética como la Guerra de las Galaxias, sino hacia
proyectos armamentísticos, investigación en tecnologías de comunicación y
vigilancia y otras preocupaciones relacionadas con la seguridad.  En algún grado
esto siempre fue cierto.  Los miles de millones de dólares gastados en la
investigación de misiles siempre empequeñecieron las sumas asignadas al programa
espacial.  Para los '70 cualquier investigación básica era conducida en base a
prioridades militares.  Una de las razones por las que no tenemos fábricas robot
es porque aproximadamente el 95% del financiamiento de la investigación robótica
ha sido orientado por el Pentágono, cuyo interés reside en el desarrollo de
drones no tripulados antes que en automatizar la producción.

A case could be made that even the shift to research and development on
information technologies and medicine was not so much a reorientation toward
market-driven consumer imperatives, but part of an all-out effort to follow the
technological humbling of the Soviet Union with total victory in the global
class war—seen simultaneously as the imposition of absolute U.S. military
dominance overseas, and, at home, the utter rout of social movements.

Podría decirse que este cambio hacia la investigación y desarrollo de
tecnologías informáticas y médicas no fue tanto una reorientación por los
imperativos de mercado de consumo, sino parte de un esfuerzo hacia la
humillación tecnológica de la Unión Soviética sumada a una victoria total en la
guerra de clases global --vista simultáneamente como la imposición absoluta de
la dominación militar estadounidense en el exterior y, localmente, en la
profunda derrota de los movimientos sociales.

For the technologies that did emerge proved most conducive to surveillance, work
discipline, and social control. Computers have opened up certain spaces of
freedom, as we’re constantly reminded, but instead of leading to the workless
utopia Abbie Hoffman imagined, they have been employed in such a way as to
produce the opposite effect. They have enabled a financialization of capital
that has driven workers desperately into debt, and, at the same time, provided
the means by which employers have created “flexible” work regimes that have both
destroyed traditional job security and increased working hours for almost
everyone. Along with the export of factory jobs, the new work regime has routed
the union movement and destroyed any possibility of effective working-class
politics.

Las tecnologías que sí emergieron están en el campo de la vigilancia, la
disciplina laboral y el control social.  Las computadoras han abierto ciertos
espacios de libertad, como somos recordadas constantemente, pero en lugar de
llevarnos a la utopía del fin del trabajo que imaginaba Abbie Hoffman, fueron
empleadas para producir el efecto contrario.  Han habilitado una
financialización del capital que ha empujado a las trabajadoras a la
desesperación de la deuda, a la vez que proveen los medios por los que los
empleadores han creado regímenes laborales "flexibles" que han destruido la
seguridad laboral tradicional y aumentado las horas laborales para casi todo el
mundo.  Junto con la exportación de los trabajos fabriles, el nuevo régimen
laboral ha derrotado al movimiento sindical y destruido cualquier posibilidad de
política obrera efectiva.

Meanwhile, despite unprecedented investment in research on medicine and life
sciences, we await cures for cancer and the common cold, and the most dramatic
medical breakthroughs we have seen have taken the form of drugs such as Prozac,
Zoloft, or Ritalin—tailor-made to ensure that the new work demands don’t drive
us completely, dysfunctionally crazy.

Mientras tanto, a pesar de la inversión sin precedentes en investigación médica
y biológica todavía esperamos curas para el cáncer y el resfrío común y los
descubrimientos médicos más dramáticos han tomado la forma de drogas como
_Prozac_, _Zoloft_ o _Ritalin_ --creadas específicamente para asegurarse que las
nuevas demandas del trabajo no nos vuelvan completa y disfuncionalmente locas.

With results like these, what will the epitaph for neoliberalism look like? I
think historians will conclude it was a form of capitalism that systematically
prioritized political imperatives over economic ones.  Given a choice between a
course of action that would make capitalism seem the only possible economic
system, and one that would transform capitalism into a viable, long-term
economic system, neoliberalism chooses the former every time. There is every
reason to believe that destroying job security while increasing working hours
does not create a more productive (let alone more innovative or loyal)
workforce.  Probably, in economic terms, the result is negative—an impression
confirmed by lower growth rates in just about all parts of the world in the
eighties and nineties.

Con resultados como estos, ¿cuál será el epitafio del neoliberalismo?  Creo que
las historiadoras concluirán que se trató de una forma de capitalismo que
priorizó sistemáticamente los imperativos políticos sobre los económicos.  Ante
la elección entre un curso de acción que volvería al capitalismo el único
sistema económico posible y otro que transformaría el capitalismo en un sistema
económico viable a largo plazo, el neoliberalismo elige la primera opción cada
vez.  Tenemos todas las razones para pensar que destruir la seguridad laboral a
la vez que se incrementan las horas laborales no crea una fuerza laboral más
productiva (sin pensar en la más innovativa o leal).  Probablemente, en términos
económicos, el resultado es negativo.  Esta impresión queda confirmada por las
tasas de crecimiento más bajas alrededor del mundo en los '80 y '90.

But the neoliberal choice has been effective in depoliticizing labor and
overdetermining the future. Economically, the growth of armies, police, and
private security services amounts to dead weight. It’s possible, in fact, that
the very dead weight of the apparatus created to ensure the ideological victory
of capitalism will sink it. But it’s also easy to see how choking off any sense
of an inevitable, redemptive future that could be different from our world is a
crucial part of the neoliberal project.

Pero la elección neoliberal ha sido efectiva en la despolitización del trabajo y
la sobredeterminación del futuro.  Económicamente, el crecimiento de los
ejércitos, la policía y la seguridad privada equivale a peso muerto.  Es
posible, de hecho, que el peso muerto del aparato que ha sido creado para
asegurar la victoria ideológica del capitalismo sea el mismo que lo hunda.  Pero
resulta fácil ver como el ahogo de cualquier sensación de un futuro inevitable y
redentor a nuestro mundo actual es parte crucial del proyecto neoliberal.

[A]{.dropcap}t this point all the pieces would seem to be falling neatly into
place. By the sixties, conservative political forces were growing skittish about
the socially disruptive effects of technological progress, and employers were
beginning to worry about the economic impact of mechanization. The fading Soviet
threat allowed for a reallocation of resources in directions seen as less
challenging to social and economic arrangements, or indeed directions that could
support a campaign of reversing the gains of progressive social movements and
achieving a decisive victory in what U.S. elites saw as a global class war. The
change of priorities was introduced as a withdrawal of big-government projects
and a return to the market, but in fact the change shifted government-directed
research away from programs like NASA or alternative energy sources and toward
military, information, and medical technologies.

En este punto todas las piezas parecen caer en su lugar.  En los '60, las
fuerzas políticas conservadoras estaban atemorizadas de los efectos disruptivos
para la sociedad que tenía el progreso tecnológico y los empleadores empezaban a
preocuparse por el impacto económico de la mecanización.  La desvaneciente
amenaza soviética permitió reacomodar los recursos en direcciones vistas como
menos desafiantes para los arreglos sociales y económicos.  Direcciones que de
hecho apoyaban una campaña que reviertiera los logros de los movimientos
sociales progresivos y alcance una victoria decisiva en los que las élites
estadounidenses veían como una guerra de clase global.  El cambio de prioridades
fue introducido como una retirada de los proyectos de gran gobierno y un regreso
al mercado, pero en efecto el cambio fue que la investigación pública sea
dirigida de programas como NASA o fuentes de energía alternativas hacia las
tecnologías militares, informáticas y médicas.

Of course this doesn’t explain everything. Above all, it does not explain why,
even in those areas that have become the focus of well-funded research projects,
we have not seen anything like the kind of advances anticipated fifty years
ago. If 95 percent of robotics research has been funded by the military, then
where are the Klaatu-style killer robots shooting death rays from their eyes?

Por supuerto esto no lo explica todo.  Sobre todo, no explica por qué, aun en
aquellas áreas que se han convertido en el foco de la financiación de proyectos
de investigación, no hemos visto ninguno de los avances que anticipábamos 50
años atrás.  Si el 95% de la investigación robótica ha sido financiado por los
militares, ¿entonces dónde están los robots asesinados al estilo de Klaatu,
disparando rayos mortales por los ojos?

Obviously, there have been advances in military technology in recent
decades. One of the reasons we all survived the Cold War is that while nuclear
bombs might have worked as advertised, their delivery systems did not;
intercontinental ballistic missiles weren’t capable of striking cities, let
alone specific targets inside cities, and this fact meant there was little point
in launching a nuclear first strike unless you intended to destroy the world.

Obviamente, han habido avances en la tecnología militar en las décadas
recientes.  Una de las razones por las que sobrevivimos la Guerra Fría es que
mientras las bombas nucleares funcionaban como se publicitaba, los sistemas de
lanzamiento no.  Los misiles intercontinentales eran incapaces de alcanzar
ciudades, sin pensar en objetivos específicos dentro de ellas.  Este hecho
significó que había poca razón para lanzar un primer golpe nuclear a menos que
el objetivo sea destruir el mundo.

Contemporary cruise missiles are accurate by comparison. Still, precision
weapons never do seem capable of assassinating specific individuals (Saddam,
Osama, Qaddafi), even when hundreds are dropped.  And ray guns have not
materialized—surely not for lack of trying. We can assume the Pentagon has spent
billions on death ray research, but the closest they’ve come so far are lasers
that might, if aimed correctly, blind an enemy gunner looking directly at the
beam. Aside from being unsporting, this is pathetic: lasers are a fifties
technology. Phasers that can be set to stun do not appear to be on the drawing
boards; and when it comes to infantry combat, the preferred weapon almost
everywhere remains the AK-47, a Soviet design named for the year it was
introduced: 1947.

Los misiles de crucero contemporáneos son precisos en comparación.  Aun así, las
armas de precisión nunca parecen ser capaces de asesinar a individuos
específicos (Saddam, Osama, Qaddafi) aun cuando se lanzan cientos.  Y las armas
de rayos no se han materializado, no por falta de intentos.  Podemos asumir que
el Pentágono ha gastado miles de millones en investigación de rayos mortales,
pero lo más cerca que han llegado es a lásers que podrían, apuntados
correctamente, cegar a un enemigo mirándolo directamente.  Aparte de ser
antideportivos, son patéticos: los láser son tecnología de los '50.  Los
_phasers_ que aturden no parecen estar en las pizarras.  Cuando se trata de
combate de infantería, el arma preferida en casi todos lados sigue siendo la
AK-47, un diseño soviético nombrado por el año de introducción: 1947.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber08w360.png){.alignright
.wp-image-1966 .size-full width="360" height="346"} The Internet is a remarkable
innovation, but all we are talking about is a super-fast and globally accessible
combination of library, post office, and mail-order catalogue. Had the Internet
been described to a science fiction aficionado in the fifties and sixties and
touted as the most dramatic technological achievement since his time, his
reaction would have been disappointment. *Fifty years and this is the best our
scientists managed to come up with? We expected computers that would think!*

La Internet es una innovación remarcable, pero de lo que estamos hablando es de
una combinación super-rápida y globalmente accesible de biblioteca, oficina de
correos y catálogo de compra por correo.  Si la Internet hubiera sido descrita a
una aficionada de la ciencia ficcion de los '50 y '60 y nombrada el logro
tecnológico más dramático de su tiempo, su reacción sería de decepción.
"¿Cincuenta años y esto es lo mejor que nuestras científicas pudieron lograr?
¡Esperábamos computadoras que puedan _pensar_!"

Overall, levels of research funding have increased dramatically since the
seventies. Admittedly, the proportion of that funding that comes from the
corporate sector has increased most dramatically, to the point that private
enterprise is now funding twice as much research as the government, but the
increase is so large that the total amount of government research funding, in
real-dollar terms, is much higher than it was in the sixties. “Basic,”
“curiosity-driven,” or “blue skies” research—the kind that is not driven by the
prospect of any immediate practical application, and that is most likely to lead
to unexpected breakthroughs—occupies an ever smaller proportion of the total,
though so much money is being thrown around nowadays that overall levels of
basic research funding have increased.

Los niveles de financimiento en investigación han incrementado dramáticamente
desde los '70.  La proporción de ese financiamiento que viene del sector
corporativo es lo que más ha incrementado, al punto que la empresa privada está
financiando el doble de investigación que el Estado, pero el incremento es tan
alto que la cantidad total de financiamiento público es de todas formas más alto
que en los '60.  La investigación "básica", "impulsada por la curiosidad" y "sin
usos prácticos" --el tipo de investigación que no está impulsada por el
prospecto de cualquier aplicación práctica inmediata y la que más probablemente
lleve a descubrimientos inesperados-- ocupa una mucho menor proporción sobre el
total, aunque se tira tanto dinero que el nivel global de financiamineto a la
investigación básica también ha incrementado.

Yet most observers agree that the results have been paltry. Certainly we no
longer see anything like the continual stream of conceptual revolutions—genetic
inheritance, relativity, psychoanalysis, quantum mechanics—that people had grown
used to, and even expected, a hundred years before. Why?

Aun así muchas observadoras acuerdan que los resultados han sido miserables.
Ciertamente ya no vemos nada parecido al flujo continuo de revoluciones
conceptuales --herencia genética, relatividad, psicoanálisis, mecánica
cuántica-- al que las personas estaban acostumbradas, y que esperaban, hace cien
años.  ¿Por qué?

Part of the answer has to do with the concentration of resources on a handful of
gigantic projects: “big science,” as it has come to be called. The Human Genome
Project is often held out as an example. After spending almost three billion
dollars and employing thousands of scientists and staff in five different
countries, it has mainly served to establish that there isn’t very much to be
learned from sequencing genes that’s of much use to anyone else. Even more, the
hype and political investment surrounding such projects demonstrate the degree
to which even basic research now seems to be driven by political,
administrative, and marketing imperatives that make it unlikely anything
revolutionary will happen.

Parte de la respuesta tiene que ver con la concentración de recursos en unos
pocos proyectos gigantescos: la "gran ciencia" como se ha dado en llamar.  El
Proyecto Genoma Humano a menudo es sostenido como ejemplo.  Después de gastar
casi 3 mil millones de dólares y emplear miles de científicas y personal en
cinco países distintos, ha servido para establecer que no hay mucho que aprender
del secuenciamiento genético que sea de utilidad.  Aun más, el bombo y la
inversión política alrededor de estos proyectos demuestra el grado al que
incluso la investigación básica parece ser impulsada por imperativos políticos,
administrativos y de _marketing_ que vuelven casi imposible que ocurra algo
revolucionario.

Here, our fascination with the mythic origins of Silicon Valley and the Internet
has blinded us to what’s really going on. It has allowed us to imagine that
research and development is now driven, primarily, by small teams of plucky
entrepreneurs, or the sort of decentralized cooperation that creates open-source
software. This is not so, even though such research teams are most likely to
produce results. Research and development is still driven by giant bureaucratic
projects.

Aquí, nuestra fascinación con los orígenes míticos de _Silicon Valley_ y la
Internet nos han cegado a lo que realmente está sucediendo.  Nos ha hecho
imaginar que la investigación y desarrollo es impulsada principalmente por
pequeños equipos de emprendedores o la cooperación decentralizada que crea el
software libre.  Esto no es así, aun cuando estos equipos tengan la mayor
probabilidad de obtener resultados.  La investigación y desarrollo todavía es
impulsada por grandes y burocráticos proyectos.

What has changed is the bureaucratic culture. The increasing interpenetration of
government, university, and private firms has led everyone to adopt the
language, sensibilities, and organizational forms that originated in the
corporate world. Although this might have helped in creating marketable
products, since that is what corporate bureaucracies are designed to do, in
terms of fostering original research, the results have been catastrophic.

Lo que ha cambiado es la cultura burocrática.  La interpenetración creciente
entre Estado, Universidad y empresas privadas ha llevado a todo el mundo a
adoptar el lenguaje, las sensibilidades y las formas organizacionales que
originaron el mundo corporativo.  Aunque esto haya ayudado a crear bienes de
consumo, ya que esto es lo que las burocracias corporativas hacen, los
resultados han sido catastróficos en términos de promover la investigación
original.

My own knowledge comes from universities, both in the United States and
Britain. In both countries, the last thirty years have seen a veritable
explosion of the proportion of working hours spent on administrative tasks at
the expense of pretty much everything else. In my own university, for instance,
we have more administrators than faculty members, and the faculty members, too,
are expected to spend at least as much time on administration as on teaching and
research combined. The same is true, more or less, at universities worldwide.

Mi propio conocimiento proviene de las universidades, tanto en Estados Unidos
como en Inglaterra.  En ambos países, los últimos 30 años han presenciado una
verdadera explosión en la proporción de horas laborales utilizadas en tareas
administrativas a expensas de cualquier otra tarea.  En mi propio universidad,
por ejemplo, tenemos más administradoras que profesoras y se espera que estas
últimas también pasen tanto tiempo en la administración como lo pasan en la
combinación de enseñanza e investigación.  Lo mismo es más o menos verdad para
todas las universidades del mundo.

The growth of administrative work has directly resulted from introducing
corporate management techniques. Invariably, these are justified as ways of
increasing efficiency and introducing competition at every level.  What they end
up meaning in practice is that everyone winds up spending most of their time
trying to sell things: grant proposals; book proposals; assessments of students’
jobs and grant applications; assessments of our colleagues; prospectuses for new
interdisciplinary majors; institutes; conference workshops; universities
themselves (which have now become brands to be marketed to prospective students
or contributors); and so on.

El auge del trabajo administrativo es resultado directo de la introducción de
las técnicas de gestión corporativas.  Invariablemente, son justificadas como
formas de incrementar la eficiencia e introducir la competencia en todos los
niveles.  Lo que termina significando en la práctica es que cada quien termina
gastando la mayor parte del tiempo tratando de vender cosas: aplicación a becas,
propuestas de libros, evaluación del trabajo y aplicaciones de becas de las
estudiantes, evaluación de las colegas, prospectos de nuevos doctorados
interdisciplinarios, institutos, talleres y conferencias, las universidades
mismas (que se han convertido en marcas que se imponen a las posibles
estudiantes y contribuidoras), etc.

As marketing overwhelms university life, it generates documents about fostering
imagination and creativity that might just as well have been designed to
strangle imagination and creativity in the cradle. No major new works of social
theory have emerged in the United States in the last thirty years. We have been
reduced to the equivalent of medieval scholastics, writing endless annotations
of French theory from the seventies, despite the guilty awareness that if new
incarnations of Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, or Pierre Bourdieu were to
appear in the academy today, we would deny them tenure.

Mientras el _marketing_ satura la vida universitaria, genera documentos acerca
de la promoción de la imaginación y la creatividad que bien podrían usarse para
estrangular ambas en la cuna.  En los últimos 30 años no han emergido grandes
obras en teoría social en los Estados Unidos.  Nos han reducido a escolásticas
medievales, escribiendo infinitas anotaciones sobre teoría francesa de los '70,
con la culposa conciencia de que si Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault o Pierre
Bourdieu reencarnaran hoy les negaríamos la cátedra.

There was a time when academia was society’s refuge for the eccentric,
brilliant, and impractical. No longer. It is now the domain of professional
self-marketers. As a result, in one of the most bizarre fits of social
self-destructiveness in history, we seem to have decided we have no place for
our eccentric, brilliant, and impractical citizens.  Most languish in their
mothers’ basements, at best making the occasional, acute intervention on the
Internet.

Hubo un tiempo en el que la academia era el refugio de lo excéntrico, lo
brillenta y lo impráctico.  Ya no más.  Ahora es el dominio de los
auto-promotores.  Como resultado, en uno de los más bizarros ataques de
auto-destrucción social en la historia, hemos decidido que ya no hay lugar para
las ciudadanas excéntricas, brillantes e imprácticas.  La mayoría languidece en
el sótano de sus madres, a lo mejor haciendo la ocasional intervención en la
Internet.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber10w400.png){.alignleft
.wp-image-1968 width="360" height="324"} If all this is true in the social
sciences, where research is still carried out with minimal overhead largely by
individuals, one can imagine how much worse it is for astrophysicists. And,
indeed, one astrophysicist, Jonathan Katz, has recently warned students
pondering a career in the sciences. Even if you do emerge from the usual
decade-long period languishing as someone else’s flunky, he says, you can expect
your best ideas to be stymied at every point:
    
Si todo esto es verdad para las ciencias sociales, donde la investigación
todavía es llevada con mínimo gasto por personales individuales, solo podemos
imaginar lo difícil que se hace para las astrofísicas.  De hecho, recientemente
un astrofísico llamado Jonathan Katz ha advertido a las estudiantes con
perspectivas de hacer carrera en las ciencias.  Aun cuando emerjas de una década
de estar a la sombra de alguien más, tus mejores ideas van a ser menospreciadas
a cada paso:

> You will spend your time writing proposals rather than doing research.  Worse,
> because your proposals are judged by your competitors, you cannot follow your
> curiosity, but must spend your effort and talents on anticipating and
> deflecting criticism rather than on solving the important scientific
> problems. . . . It is proverbial that original ideas are the kiss of death for
> a proposal, because they have not yet been proved to work.

> Vas a pasar el tiempo escribiendo propuestas antes que haciendo investigación.
> Peor aún, ya que tus propuestas son juzgadas por tu competencia, no vas a
> poder seguir tus curiosidades sino que tenés que poner todos tus esfuerzos y
> talentos en anticipar y desviar las críticas antes que en resolver problemas
> científicos importantes. [...] Resulta proverbial que las ideas originales
> sean el beso de la muerte de una propuesta, porque aun no se ha demostrado que
> funcionen.

That pretty much answers the question of why we don’t have teleportation devices
or antigravity shoes. Common sense suggests that if you want to maximize
scientific creativity, you find some bright people, give them the resources they
need to pursue whatever idea comes into their heads, and then leave them
alone. Most will turn up nothing, but one or two may well discover
something. But if you want to minimize the possibility of unexpected
breakthroughs, tell those same people they will receive no resources at all
unless they spend the bulk of their time competing against each other to
convince you they know in advance what they are going to discover.

Esto responde la pregunta sobre por qué no tenemos dispositivos de
teletransportación o zapatos antigravitatorios.  El sentido común sugiere que si
queremos maximizar la creatividad científica, tenés que encontrar gente
brillante, darle los recursos que necesiten para realizar las ideas que tengan y
dejarles en paz.  La mayoría resultará en nada, pero una o dos descubrirán algo.
Pero si querés minimizar la posibilidad de desarrollos inesperados, deciles a
esas mismas personas que no van a recibir recursos hasta que pasan la mayor
parte de su tiempo compitiendo entre sí para convencerte que saben de antemano
aquello que van a descubrir.

In the natural sciences, to the tyranny of managerialism we can add the
privatization of research results. As the British economist David Harvie has
reminded us, “open source” research is not new. Scholarly research has always
been open source, in the sense that scholars share materials and results. There
is competition, certainly, but it is “convivial.”  This is no longer true of
scientists working in the corporate sector, where findings are jealously
guarded, but the spread of the corporate ethos within the academy and research
institutes themselves has caused even publicly funded scholars to treat their
findings as personal property. Academic publishers ensure that findings that are
published are increasingly difficult to access, further enclosing the
intellectual commons. As a result, convivial, open-source competition turns into
something much more like classic market competition.

En las ciencias naturales, podemos agregar la privatización de los resultados de
la investigación a la tiranía de la administración.  Como nos recuerda el
economista británico David Harvie, la investigación "open
source"[^ciencia-abierta] no es nueva.  La investigación académica siempre ha
sido abierta en el sentido de que las académicas comparten materiales y
resultados.  Existe la competencia, ciertamente, pero es "amistosa".  Esto ya no
es verdad para las científicas que trabajan en el sector corporativo, donde los
hallazgos son celosamente guardados.  La difusión del _ethos_ corporativo dentro
de la academia y los institutos de investigación ha resultado en que incluso las
investigaciones con financiamiento público traten sus hallazgos como propiedad
privada.  Las editoriales académicas aseguran que los hallazgos que son
publicados sean cada vez más difíciles de acceder, cercando los bienes comunes
intelectuales.  Como resultado, la competencia abierta, amistosa, se convierte
en algo mucho más parecido a la competencia de mercado clásica.

[^ciencia-abierta]: ???

// me choca que un termino del orto como open source termine en cosas como open
etc. -- f

There are many forms of privatization, up to and including the simple buying up
and suppression of inconvenient discoveries by large corporations fearful of
their economic effects. (We cannot know how many synthetic fuel formulae have
been bought up and placed in the vaults of oil companies, but it’s hard to
imagine nothing like this happens.) More subtle is the way the managerial ethos
discourages everything adventurous or quirky, especially if there is no prospect
of immediate results. Oddly, the Internet can be part of the problem here. As
Neal Stephenson put it:

Existen muchas formas de privatización, incluyendo la simple compra y supresión
de descubrimientos inconvenientes para las grandes corporaciones, temerosas de
sus posibles efectos económicos.  (No podemos saber cuántas fórmulas de petróleo
sintético han aparecido para terminar en las bóvedas de las compañías
petroleras, pero resulta difícil imaginar que esto pasa todo el tiempo.)  Una
forma más sutil es donde el _ethos_ administrativo desalienta todo lo que sea
aventurero o extraño, especialmente si no hay prospecto de resultados
inmediatos.  Extrañamente, la Internet es parte del problema.  Como decía Neal
Stephenson:

> Most people who work in corporations or academia have witnessed something like
> the following: A number of engineers are sitting together in a room, bouncing
> ideas off each other. Out of the discussion emerges a new concept that seems
> promising. Then some laptop-wielding person in the corner, having performed a
> quick Google search, announces that this “new” idea is, in fact, an old one;
> it—or at least something vaguely similar—has already been tried. Either it
> failed, or it succeeded. If it failed, then no manager who wants to keep his
> or her job will approve spending money trying to revive it.  If it succeeded,
> then it’s patented and entry to the market is presumed to be unattainable,
> since the first people who thought of it will have “first-mover advantage” and
> will have created “barriers to entry.” The number of seemingly promising ideas
> that have been crushed in this way must number in the millions.

> La mayoría de las personas que trabajan en corporaciones o en la academia ha
> presenciado algo como lo siguiente: un grupo de ingenieras se encuentran en
> una habitación proponiéndose ideas entre sí.  De esta discusión emerge un
> nuevo concepto que parece prometedor.  Entonces alguien con una computadora
> portátil realiza una búsqueda en _Google_ y anuncia que esta "nueva" idea en
> realidad es vieja.  Ya sido probada, o al menos algo vagamente similar.  Ha
> fallado o ha sido exitosa.  Si ha fallado, ninguna administradora con ganas de
> mantener su trabajo aprobaría el uso de dinero tratando de revivirla.  Si ha
> sido exitosa, entonces ha sido patentada y el ingreso al mercado se presume
> inalcanzable, ya que las primeras personas que la han pensado tienen la
> "ventaja inicial" y han creado "barreras para el ingreso".  La cantidad de
> ideas prometedoras que han sido aplastadas de esta forma deben contarse entre
> los millones.

And so a timid, bureaucratic spirit suffuses every aspect of cultural life. It
comes festooned in a language of creativity, initiative, and
entrepreneurialism. But the language is meaningless. Those thinkers most likely
to make a conceptual breakthrough are the least likely to receive funding, and,
if breakthroughs occur, they are not likely to find anyone willing to follow up
on their most daring implications.

Entonces un espíritu tímido y burocrático sofoca cualquier aspecto de la vida
cultural.  Viene adornado con un lenguaje de creatividad, iniciativa y
emprendedorismo.  Pero el lenguaje es insignificante.  Las pensadoras con mayor
probabilidad de lograr descubrimientos interesantes son las que tienen menos
probabilidad de conseguir financiamiento.  Y cuando los descubrimientos ocurren,
probablemente no encuentren a nadie con la voluntad de seguir sus implicaciones
más audaces.

Giovanni Arrighi has noted that after the South Sea Bubble, British capitalism
largely abandoned the corporate form. By the time of the Industrial Revolution,
Britain had instead come to rely on a combination of high finance and small
family firms—a pattern that held throughout the next century, the period of
maximum scientific and technological innovation. (Britain at that time was also
notorious for being just as generous to its oddballs and eccentrics as
contemporary America is intolerant. A common expedient was to allow them to
become rural vicars, who, predictably, became one of the main sources for
amateur scientific discoveries.)

Giovanni Arrighi señalaba que luego de la burbuja del Mar del Sur[^burbuja] en
1720, el capitalismo británico abandonó ampliamente la forma corporativa.  Para
la Revolución Industrial, Inglaterra había pasado a una combinación de altas
finanzas y pequeñas empresas familiares --patrón que se sostuvo durante el siglo
posterior, el período de máxima innovación científica y tecnológica.
(Inglaterra era por entonces famosa por ser tan generosa con sus bichos raros y
excéntricos como intolerante es Estados Unidos.  Una solución común era
permitirles convertirse en párrocos rurales, quienes se convirtieron en una de
las mayores fuentes de descubrimientos científicos amateur.)


[^burbuja]: https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compa%C3%B1%C3%ADa_del_Mar_del_Sur#Estalla_la_burbuja

Contemporary, bureaucratic corporate capitalism was a creation not of
Britain, but of the United States and Germany, the two rival powers that
spent the first half of the twentieth century fighting two bloody wars
over who would replace Britain as a dominant world power—wars that
culminated, appropriately enough, in government-sponsored scientific
programs to see who would be the first to discover the atom bomb. It is
significant, then, that our current technological stagnation seems to
have begun after 1945, when the United States replaced Britain as
organizer of the world economy.

El capitalismo corporativo burócratico contemporáneo no fue la creación de
Inglaterra, sino de los Estados Unidos y Alemania, los dos poderes rivales que
pasaron la primer mitad del siglo XX luchando dos sangrientas guerras para
reemplazar a Inglaterra como el poder mundial dominante --guerras que
culminaron, apropiadamente, en programas esponsoreados por el Estado para ser
los primeros en descubrir la bomba atómica.  Resulta significativo entonces, que
el estancamiento tecnológico actual haya comenzado en 1945, cuando los Estados
Unidos reemplazaron a Inglaterra como los organizadores de la economía mundial.

Americans do not like to think of themselves as a nation of
bureaucrats—quite the opposite—but the moment we stop imagining
bureaucracy as a phenomenon limited to government offices, it becomes
obvious that this is precisely what we have become. The final victory
over the Soviet Union did not lead to the domination of the market, but,
in fact, cemented the dominance of conservative managerial elites,
corporate bureaucrats who use the pretext of short-term, competitive,
bottom-line thinking to squelch anything likely to have revolutionary
implications of any kind.

A los estadounidenses no les gusta pensarse como una nación de burócratas --todo
lo contrario-- pero en el m

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber11w400.png){.alignright
.wp-image-1970 width="360" height="288"} [I]{.dropcap}f we do not notice that we
live in a bureaucratic society, that is because bureaucratic norms and practices
have become so all-pervasive that we cannot see them, or, worse, cannot imagine
doing things any other way.

Computers have played a crucial role in this narrowing of our social
imaginations. Just as the invention of new forms of industrial automation in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries had the paradoxical effect of turning more
and more of the world’s population into full-time industrial workers, so has all
the software designed to save us from administrative responsibilities turned us
into part- or full-time administrators. In the same way that university
professors seem to feel it is inevitable they will spend more of their time
managing grants, so affluent housewives simply accept that they will spend weeks
every year filling out forty-page online forms to get their children into grade
schools. We all spend increasing amounts of time punching passwords into our
phones to manage bank and credit accounts and learning how to perform jobs once
performed by travel agents, brokers, and accountants.

Someone once figured out that the average American will spend a cumulative six
months of life waiting for traffic lights to change. I don’t know if similar
figures are available for how long it takes to fill out forms, but it must be at
least as long. No population in the history of the world has spent nearly so
much time engaged in paperwork.

In this final, stultifying stage of capitalism, we are moving from poetic
technologies to bureaucratic technologies. By poetic technologies I refer to the
use of rational and technical means to bring wild fantasies to reality. Poetic
technologies, so understood, are as old as civilization. Lewis Mumford noted
that the first complex machines were made of people. Egyptian pharaohs were able
to build the pyramids only because of their mastery of administrative
procedures, which allowed them to develop production-line techniques, dividing
up complex tasks into dozens of simple operations and assigning each to one team
of workmen—even though they lacked mechanical technology more complex than the
inclined plane and lever. Administrative oversight turned armies of peasant
farmers into the cogs of a vast machine. Much later, after cogs had been
invented, the design of complex machinery elaborated principles originally
developed to organize people.

Yet we have seen those machines—whether their moving parts are arms and torsos
or pistons, wheels, and springs—being put to work to realize impossible
fantasies: cathedrals, moon shots, transcontinental railways.  Certainly, poetic
technologies had something terrible about them; the poetry is likely to be as
much of dark satanic mills as of grace or liberation. But the rational,
administrative techniques were always in service to some fantastic end.

From this perspective, all those mad Soviet plans—even if never realized—marked
the climax of poetic technologies. What we have now is the reverse. It’s not
that vision, creativity, and mad fantasies are no longer encouraged, but that
most remain free-floating; there’s no longer even the pretense that they could
ever take form or flesh. The greatest and most powerful nation that has ever
existed has spent the last decades telling its citizens they can no longer
contemplate fantastic collective enterprises, even if—as the environmental
crisis demands— the fate of the earth depends on it.

[W]{.dropcap}hat are the political implications of all this? First of all, we
need to rethink some of our most basic assumptions about the nature of
capitalism. One is that capitalism is identical with the market, and that both
therefore are inimical to bureaucracy, which is supposed to be a creature of the
state.

The second assumption is that capitalism is in its nature technologically
progressive. It would seem that Marx and Engels, in their giddy enthusiasm for
the industrial revolutions of their day, were wrong about this. Or, to be more
precise: they were right to insist that the mechanization of industrial
production would destroy capitalism; they were wrong to predict that market
competition would compel factory owners to mechanize anyway. If it didn’t
happen, that is because market competition is not, in fact, as essential to the
nature of capitalism as they had assumed. If nothing else, the current form of
capitalism, where much of the competition seems to take the form of internal
marketing within the bureaucratic structures of large semi-monopolistic
enterprises, would come as a complete surprise to them.

Defenders of capitalism make three broad historical claims: first, that it has
fostered rapid scientific and technological growth; second, that however much it
may throw enormous wealth to a small minority, it does so in such a way as to
increase overall prosperity; third, that in doing so, it creates a more secure
and democratic world for everyone. It is clear that capitalism is not doing any
of these things any longer. In fact, many of its defenders are retreating from
claiming that it is a good system and instead falling back on the claim that it
is the only possible system—or, at least, the only possible system for a
complex, technologically sophisticated society such as our own.

But how could anyone argue that current economic arrangements are also the only
ones that will ever be viable under any possible future technological society?
The argument is absurd. How could anyone know?

Granted, there are people who take that position—on both ends of the political
spectrum. As an anthropologist and anarchist, I encounter anticivilizational
types who insist not only that current industrial technology leads only to
capitalist-style oppression, but that this must necessarily be true of any
future technology as well, and therefore that human liberation can be achieved
only by returning to the Stone Age.  Most of us are not technological
determinists.

But claims for the inevitability of capitalism have to be based on a kind of
technological determinism. And for that very reason, if the aim of neoliberal
capitalism is to create a world in which no one believes any other economic
system could work, then it needs to suppress not just any idea of an inevitable
redemptive future, but any radically different technological future. Yet there’s
a contradiction. Defenders of capitalism cannot mean to convince us that
technological change has ended—since that would mean capitalism is not
progressive. No, they mean to convince us that technological progress is indeed
continuing, that we do live in a world of wonders, but that those wonders take
the form of modest improvements (the latest iPhone!), rumors of inventions about
to happen (“I hear they are going to have flying cars pretty soon”), complex
ways of juggling information and imagery, and still more complex platforms for
filling out of forms.

I do not mean to suggest that neoliberal capitalism—or any other system—can be
successful in this regard. First, there’s the problem of trying to convince the
world you are leading the way in technological progress when you are holding it
back. The United States, with its decaying infrastructure, paralysis in the face
of global warming, and symbolically devastating abandonment of its manned space
program just as China accelerates its own, is doing a particularly bad public
relations job. Second, the pace of change can’t be held back forever.
Breakthroughs will happen; inconvenient discoveries cannot be permanently
suppressed. Other, less bureaucratized parts of the world—or at least, parts of
the world with bureaucracies that are not so hostile to creative thinking—will
slowly but inevitably attain the resources required to pick up where the United
States and its allies have left off. The Internet does provide opportunities for
collaboration and dissemination that may help break us through the wall as
well. Where will the breakthrough come? We can’t know. Maybe 3D printing will do
what the robot factories were supposed to. Or maybe it will be something
else. But it will happen.

![image](Of%20Flying%20Cars%20and%20the%20Declining%20Rate%20of%20Profit_files/LewisGraeber18w540.png){.aligncenter
.size-full .wp-image-1972 width="540" height="315"}

[A]{.dropcap}bout one conclusion we can feel especially confident: it will not
happen within the framework of contemporary corporate capitalism—or any form of
capitalism. To begin setting up domes on Mars, let alone to develop the means to
figure out if there are alien civilizations to contact, we’re going to have to
figure out a different economic system. Must the new system take the form of
some massive new bureaucracy? Why do we assume it must? Only by breaking up
existing bureaucratic structures can we begin. And if we’re going to invent
robots that will do our laundry and tidy up the kitchen, then we’re going to
have to make sure that whatever replaces capitalism is based on a far more
egalitarian distribution of wealth and power—one that no longer contains either
the super-rich or the desperately poor willing to do their housework. Only then
will technology begin to be marshaled toward human needs. And this is the best
reason to break free of the dead hand of the hedge fund managers and the CEOs—to
free our fantasies from the screens in which such men have imprisoned them, to
let our imaginations once again become a material force in human history.

